---
title: 1954-1968
permalink: /overview/1954-1968/
categories:
  - overview
tags: draft
header:
  overlay_image: hen_00_a2-178-1280-square.jpg
  overlay_filter: .5
  caption: "Paul Robeson and Dr. John E.T. Camper protesting at Ford’s Theatre. Paul Henderson, c. 1948. _Courtesy Maryland Historical Society, [HEN.00.A2-156](https://hendersonphotos.wordpress.com/2012/02/15/full-text-protesting-jim-crow-admissions-policy-at-fords-theatre/#jp-carousel-1277)._"
---

## Introduction

Questions:

- How to talk about the rise of black power and the changes that CORE and the Black Panther Party brought to Civil Rights in Baltimore?
- How to talk about city and state politics?

## What are the changes that matter most from this period?

- Desegregation of schools and public accommodations
- A new legal framework for Civil Rights

What else was changing?

- Suburban growth
- Urban renewal in the downtown, displacement for highway projects and public housing

Between 1950 and 1960, according to the U.S. Census, the population of Baltimore County grew by over 80% (from 270,273 to 492,428). In the same period, Baltimore lost population for the first time dropping from 949,708  to 939,024. The pace of suburban growth slowed between 1960 ad 1970 but the population of Baltimore County still increased over 25% (to 621,077 in 1970). Similarly in Anne Arunel County, the population grew from 117,392 in 1950 to 206,634 in 1960 to 297,539 in 1970.

### Organizing

- How did approaches to organizing in the Civil Rights movement change during this period?
- Does this period represent a move away from interracial organizing? What role did anti-communism play in that change?

## Places

Examples of Related Properties

- Campus YMCA, Levering Hall, Johns Hopkins University
- Arena Playhouse

The Melvin Cade National Guard Armory moved to its current location at 2620 Winchester Street in 1960. The new building immediately became a civic and social center for West Baltimore, hosting dance parties, lectures, and neighborhood meetings throughout the 1960s and 1970s. After the death of Melvin H. Cade, commanding officer of the 229th Battalion of the Maryland National Guard, in 1964, the Guard renamed the building in his honor. Baltimore City listed the Armory on its historic landmark list in 2009. It is one of the few examples of a national guard facility built for a segregated black unit.

## Brown v. Board of Education

In 1954, the Supreme Court decision in [Brown v. Board of Education](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brown_v._Board_of_Education) made the segregation of Maryland’s schools illegal—overturning the decision in Plessy v. Ferguson from 58 years earlier. African-Americans in Maryland and around the nation struggled to see change in the face of both visible “Massive Resistance,” and more subtle or invisible forms of resistance. In response to the efforts of direct action protests around the country and intense lobbying by Civil Rights advocates in Washington, D.C., Congress followed the  consequential Supreme Court decision by passing the [Civil Rights Act of 1957](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_Rights_Act_of_1957) and the [Civil Rights Act of 1960](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_Rights_Act_of_1960).

The 1957 legislation signed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the first civil rights bill since Reconstruction, created the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. The Commission—though limited to fact-finding—played a key role in  documenting injustice, leading to expanded authority under the 1964 Civil Rights legislation. The Maryland Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights played an active role in this process publishing a number of reports in the 1960s and 1970s.

African-American women who experienced the burden of both racial and gender discrimination saw progress with the passage of the [Equal Pay Act of 1963](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Pay_Act_of_1963)and new protection against gender discrimination in the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
 
The National Historic Landmarks program described the Civil Rights Act of 1964, writing:

The Brown v. Board of Education decision brought much broader changes to Baltimore's political and social institutions than just public schools. Progress in securing legal protections for Civil Rights and growing support from white elected officials was tempered by the fast-pace of racial transition in many Baltimore neighborhoods. In 1955, the Baltimore Sun published a series, and  “The City We Live In,” highlighting issues around race and civil rights. That same year, the Baltimore City Council published “A City in Transition,” addressing the same issues. In 1956, the Council passed the Baltimore City Equal Employment Ordinance.

Mayor McKeldin [June 1966](http://archives.ubalt.edu/hwc/pdf/civil-rights-mayors-committee.pdf):

> In response to those who might say that we have made significant progress in the field of civil rights, I could say that I agree; but, I would also have to say that there are problems – important problems – which have thus far not been resolved; and I believe that this City can no longer delay meeting its responsibilities, both in the public and private sectors of community life.
> The fact is that while we have moved, we have not moved toward the solution of these problems with the speed and vigor with which we are capable.
> We have not really attempted, as a community, to understand the plight, the unrest, and the feelings of those who have been denied.
> We have not attempted to understand why, even after significant progress, our negro brethren still insist that all is not right nor community – that there is much to be done.

### Student movement

> The campus YMCA at Johns Hopkins was located at Levering Hall and joined with the Office of the Chaplain. Beginning in 1953, Chester Wickwire served as both the executive secretary of the YMCA and the university's chaplain. Wickwire and his staff aided in the development of student activism by providing a haven for liberals on an otherwise conservative campus. Out of Lever- ing Hall, Wickwire ran various student life programs such as concerts, dances, and movie screenings while simultaneously organizing political discussions about civil rights, pacifism, the Cold War, and Vietnam. Dr. Wickwire himself had strong liberal views. He was a perennial figure in Baltimore civil rights activity who served on human relations committees, organized protests, and later helped to give protection to the Black Panthers.

### Black power movement

The Black Power movement emerged during this period and helped to bring national attention to Civil Rights issues in Baltimore. This change took place at both the national and local level, exemplified by the founding of the Black Panther Party and the advocacy efforts of CORE in the late 1960s. From July 1 to July 4 1964, the Congress of Racial Equality held their national convention in Baltimore. CORE focused national attention on Baltimore again in 1966 when they announced Baltimore as the organization's first "Target City."

On July 11, 1966, the Civic Interest Group (CIG) held a press conference at St. Peter Claver's Catholic Church to publicly endorse black power and announce that "it would no longer avoid violence in cases of 'self-defense'."

On October 1, 1966, the Black Panther Party was founded in Oakland.

- 1964: CORE holds national convention in Baltimore
- 1966-10-01: Black Panther Party founded
- 1966: CORE selects Baltimore as its first "Target City"

> Arena Players began in 1953 when the founding members—Jimmie Bell, Bernard Byrd, Doris Dilver, Aurthur Thurogood, Irvin Turner, Joe Wilson, Julius Wilson, and Sam Wilson—staged “Hello Out There,” William Soroyan’s one act drama. Arena Players began as an outgrowth of “The Negro Little Theater.” This group spent ten years staging plays in a variety of locations including Coppin State University, the Druid Hill Avenue Branch of the YMCA, the Great Hall Theater of St. Mary’s Church in the Walbrook neighborhood, and the Carl J. Murphy Auditorium at Morgan State University. In 1962, the group moved into its present location at 801 McCulloh Street and established the Arena Playhouse. In 1969, the group purchased the building by using box office receipts and contributions from the founding members. From the 1950s through the 1970s, the Arena Players served as one of the only venues dedicated to showcasing the works of black playwrights and performers.

## Public accommodation

November 1953: “If You Ask Me,” Afro-American Newspaper, Mrs. B.M. Phillips:

>Thanks to the Committee On Racial Equality, (CORE), the Urban league, and the Americans for Democratic Action, (ADA), more stores in the 200 block W. Lexington st. are realizing there is no color line in the dollars you spend. Lunch counters and restaurants in the Kresge and Woolworth Five and Ten have been serving all customers for several weeks. McCrory’s has just reversed its policy and will serve all comers […] Schulte United in the 200 block Lexington is still acting silly.”

Downtown Department stores

- 1940s: Department stores discrimination against shoppers targeted by Afro American in the Orchids & Onions campaign. Onions included the May Company, Stewart’s Department Store, and Hutzler’s.
- 1960 March 26: Black student activists attempted to purchase food at department store restaurants at the Northwood Shopping Center and downtown; black students were attempting to buy lunch at four downtown department stores, only successful at Hochschild Kohn. Stewart’s shut its food counters to all, white and black, and closed the food operation. About 20 blacks entered a Hutzler’s restaurant and waited for three hours, but were not served.
- 1960 April 17: Issue resolved on Easter Sunday when the Sun reported that store executive Albert D. Hutzler met with civil rights leaders Furman Templeton, David Glenn and Robert B. Watts, then announced “We have lifted restrictions. Negroes will be served in our restaurants.” Hecht-May and other stores followed.

Source: Baltimore Sun

## Urban renewal and land use issues

- 1956, Selection of State Center as an urban renewal site

---
