---
title: "1968–1976: After the Unrest"
excerpt: "The changes of this period highlight the contradictions of a Civil Rights movement that had seen tremendous progress in securing legal rights and freedoms for African Americans in a region that still denied many the opportunity for equitable education or employment opportunities."
permalink: /overview/1968-1976/
categories:
  - overview
tags:
  - draft
sidebar:
  nav: "overview"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/1976-08-07-afram-charles-plaza.jpg
  overlay_image: /assets/images/1976-08-07-afram-charles-plaza.jpg
  overlay_filter: .5
  caption: "Charles Plaza during the first Afro-American (AFRAM) Exposition, August 7-8, 1976. Special Collections, Langsdale Library, University of Baltimore, [rbcae76n0705](https://www.flickr.com/photos/ubarchives/4724290249/) (CC BY-NC-ND)."
---

## Introduction

<!-- NOTE: Goal is 7600 words -->

<!-- NOTE: Next Steps

- Go through Zotero primary source bibliography and identify any relevant sources that I haven't included (2 hours)
- Go through Zotero shared bibliography and identify any relevant sources that I haven't included (2 hours)
- Go through the other thematic essays and add in (or summarize) any relevant information for this period (3 hours)
- Incorporate additional sources into the existing draft
- Rework revised draft by filling in any key gaps in the narrative 

-->

This period opened with the unrest following the assassination of Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in Baltimore and in cities across the country. At the national and the local level, the many residents and elected officials saw the 1968 unrest as a wake up call of the urgent need for more aggressive action on Civil Rights. However, others used the unrest to pursue a reactionary agenda opposing expanded opportunities for black Baltimoreans.

On Thursday, April 4, 1968, [Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_Martin_Luther_King_Jr.) in Memphis, Tennessee. Friday remained tense as unrest broke out in Detroit and Washington, D.C. Three hundred people gathered for a peaceful memorial service on the morning of Saturday, April 6. That afternoon, however, people began to attack properties in East Baltimore and fires broke out at multiple locations. The unrest spread quickly and continued until Thursday, April 11.

On Tuesday, April 1968, [Spiro Agnew](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spiro_Agnew) invited one hundred of Baltimore's black leaders (a group he called "moderates" in contrast with the "circuit-riding, Hanoi-visiting type of leader") to meet him at the State Center Office Building. Agnew used the meeting to harangue the group and charged them with "responsibility for the riots". Most of those in attendance walked out and some drafted an "angry rebuttal" that observed, "Agnew's actions are more in keeping with the slave system of a bygone era." They noted that by separating "good" moderates from "bad" militants, Agnew sought to divide black activists from one another. By trying to tie moderates to militants, one minister observed: "He's forcing us all to become militants."[@baum_how_2011, 160] In a reflection of the continued divisions within the Baltimore-area, however, not everyone responded with criticsm. White Baltimoreans sent hundreds of telegraphs to Agnew's office mostly to praise him. One telegraph stated: "Thankful to hear that the white people still have a strong voice in government."[@baum_how_2011, 161]

By the next day, it was clear that the consequences of the unrest and the city and state response were enormous. In summary:

- police arrested 5,512 people (nearly all of them black; totaling about 1 in every 75 black residents)
- 12,000 troops occupied the city (1 for every 75 Baltimore residents)
- 1,208 major fires
- 1,049 businesses
- 600 injuries (50 police officers)
- 6 people killed[@baum_how_2011, 160]

While the factors that shaped the Civil Rights movement and the politics of race necessarily predated the 1968 unrest, the unrest provided a new way of understanding the uncertain future of the movement and Baltimore's segregated African American neighborhoods.

Over the next decade, the Civil Rights movement in Baltimore was shaped by both a renewed progressive vision for reinvestment in historically segregated black neighborhoods and a reactionary withdrawal continuing the pattern of "white flight" that followed WWII.

These broader trends were further shaped by radical changes in local and national politics and policy. These changes were illustrated several months after the unrest at the 1968 Republican Convention, when Agnew's paternalistic lecture of Baltimore's black activists won him the nomination as [Richard Nixon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Nixon)'s Vice-President. The selection reinforced the Nixon campaign's "Southern strategy" to build support from the racist reaction to the Civil Rights policies of incumbent President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Democratic Party. Nixon's sharp cuts to funding for urban areas following his reelection in 1972 led to deep cuts to War on Poverty programs with major changes in the city's planning for urban renewal and transportation projects in historically segregated black neighborhoods. <!-- NOTE: Citation missing! -->

At the local and state level, political leaders were not always antagonistic to Civil Rights activists but often apathetic and indifferent. After the unrest, Mayor Thomas D'Alesandro opted not to run for a second term and his successor, Mayor [William Donald Schaefer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Donald_Schaefer), took a passive role on Civil Rights during his term in office. Governor [Marvin Mandel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marvin_Mandel) can be characterized as largely ambivalent on Civil Rights issues. For example, both Mayor Schaefer and Governor Mandel continued to support Baltimore City Police Commisioner [Donald Pommerlau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Pomerleau) after a Maryland State Senate investigation in 1976 revealed that over the previous decade Pommerlau had created the Inspectional Services Division (ISD) and spied on Civil Rights activists, including Representative Parren Mitchell. <!-- NOTE: Citation missing! -->

The City Council was a lone bright spot for Civil Rights activists. A contested redistricting process in early 1971 led to more opportunities for black candidates to win election to the City Council.[@price_3rd_bard_1971; @price_3rd_negro_1971; @price_3rd_districting_1971] By October, anticipating the election based on the results of the Democratic primary, the *Sun* reported:

> The Baltimore City Council, an exclusively Democratic province since before World War II, seem likely to be controlled for the first time by a coalition of liberal whites and Negroes no matter what the outcome of the general election.[@_negro-white_1971]

Revelations such as the ISD and the instability of local leadership (the Baltimore City School board, for example, went through a large number of directors in this period) led to a broad loss of trust in public institutions and elected officials among many Baltimore residents. <!-- NOTE: Citation missing! -->

The established trend of population growth in the suburbs and population loss in Baltimore City continued. Baltimore City lost a over 110,000 residents between 1970 and 1980 and African American residents went from 46.39% to 54.80% of the total. However, suburban growth also slowed.

<!-- NOTE: What happened to poverty and employment in this period? How does the city deal with job loss and revenue loss? -->

The following sections address several themes in more detail including:

- **Reorganizing the movement**: The changing leadership and organization of the Civil Rights movement in Baltimore. This theme includes both the black power movement; the increasing prominence of gender and feminism within the movement; and the intersection between the Civil Rights movement and social movements for disability rights, LGBTQ rights, and others.
- **Community development**: The shift by many prominent Civil Rights groups from a focus on segregation and discrimination to the need to address the legacy of those factors through community development. This shift was shaped by the interrelated trends of reinvestment in historically segregated neighborhoods; growing withdrawal of white residents and white-controlled businesses and institutions; and the revanchist demolition and clearance of black neighborhoods.
- The failure of government and community efforts to address **school and housing segregation**.
- New approaches to protesting police violence and the impact of police surveillance on Civil Rights activism during this period.
- The success of activists in beginning to address issues of representation among arts and cultural organizations. This theme had notable consequences in public art, monuments, and the preservation of historic places associated with African Americans in Baltimore.

## Associated Places

<!-- NOTE: What places were demolished in this period? How were black communities in Baltimore County affected by the development of I-695 and other suburban projects? -->

Loss of places:

- Demolition of the Royal Theatre
- Demolition of the Penn Hotel

Some actors within the Civil Rights movement in this period only attached to specific buildings on a temporary or fleeting basis. For example, the Baltimore Branch of the Black Panther Party organized in 1969 and shut down the organization in 1972. In that three year period, the members of the branch organized classes, community support activities, and held protest actions at dozens of different buildings and locations. <!-- NOTE: The BPP began organizing locally in 1968 --> The chapter initially operated out of a house at E. Eager Street and Homewood Avenue, offered free breakfast and lunch programs out of churches in East and West Baltimore including "St .Vincent's D. Poore's church in East Baltimore at Valley and Eager Street"[@mccutchen_black_2004] (the former St. John the Evangelist Catholic Church which closed in 1966), and, by 1970, established a "Black Community Information Center" at 1248 N. Gay Street.

Under the direction of Lenwood Ivey—first named head of CAA, then MCA, then USA—Urban Services would operate a network of neighborhood service centers that remained connected to the citizens it served through geographical proximity.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 55]

Neighborhood Centers:

> At the time of its inception, the Baltimore Urban Services Agency inherited 23 neighborhood centers from its predecessor antipoverty agencies. These centers were distributed across the city, with higher concentrations in East and West Baltimore, where the poorest neighborhoods were (and still are) concentrated. The centers occupied repurposed churches, storefronts, libraries, public baths, or (in the case of Dunbar) associated with an existing public high school. These diverse settings served as multipurpose centers for many programs and classes for children, teens, senior citizens, young mothers, the homeless, and families in crisis. Food pantries, yoga classes, poetry readings, dance performances, legal assistance, home heating assistance, library services, and many more programmatic offerings coexisted in these spaces.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 55-56]

Community Councils:

> In addition to CAA’s neighborhood centers, Model Cities also maintained six residentially based satellite centers, known as Community Councils... These Councils were also seen as centers of black political activity, particularly in East Baltimore, and therefore eyed with concern by City Councilmen and the local media. Lenwood Ivey’s decision to eliminate these Community Councils and transfer eligible staff into the municipal Civil Service system was a controversial 1976 decision that was decidedly unpopular with residents and Council staff.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 58]

Radical spaces:

> The BDC was housed in the Peace Action Center at 2525 Maryland Street on the southern and western edge of Charles Village, the neighborhood where almost all of the participants resided by that time.[@zanoni_working_2013, 69]

Transportation projects of all kinds had dispraportionate affect on black neighborhoods.

For example, in June 1968, the new pastor at Bethel AME Church, Rev. Walter L. Hildebrand, afirmed the church's plans to make the church "of utmost service to the poor, the hopeless and the oppressed."[@oliver_new_1968]. In October, Leon Sachs, director of the Baltimore Jewish Council, called for community meetings to push back against what he saw as growing anti-black racism among Jewish people in Baltimore and anti-semitimism on the part of their African American neighbors.[@_negro-jewish_1968] This context brought new significance to the decision that many white Baltimoreans and white-controlled institutions had considered since the early 1950s: to stay or leave.

In December 1969, Franklin Square hospital closed their old location completing a move to the Rosedale area of eastern Baltimore County that the hospital leadership began planning in 1961. Bon Secours Hospital stayed in West Baltimore thanks, in part, to the administrative leadership of Sister Theophane Klingelhofer (1913-1989) from 1961 to 1971.[@_sister_1989] In March 1971, the *Sun* profiled pharmacist Donald A. Schumer investment in a new building at Pennsylvania Avenue and Dolphin Street for the forty-year-old Penn-Dol Pharmacy (occupied in 2017 by Best Care Pharmacy 1133 Pennsylvania Avenue). The report noted Schumer's sale of the the store's "sundries section to several black employees who had been with him for a number of years" and observed, "The interior of the pharmacy resembles the orderly kind of drug store one expects to find in the affluent white suburbs."[@_white_1971]

In February 1968, a report on preliminary plans for what became the Baltimore Metro noted the potential demolition of over 200 homes between Provident Hospital and Mondawmin along Pennsylvania Avenue and Reisterstown Road from Mondawmin to Cold Spring Lane. [@_rapid_1968]

Black Baltimoreans continued to contend with inequtities in access to both public and private investment. For example, in August 1968, the Upton Planning Committee threatened a boycott of Lafayette Market in a successful effort to force improvements in the condition of the market.[@_boycott_1968] In the spring of 1975, a new federal study found that lenders denied home loans to African American borrowers in Baltimore at twice the rate of white borrowers.[@schwerzler_reaction_1975] Maryland National Bank reportedly "rejected black applicants for home mortgages" at nearly twelve times the rate for white applicants in 1974.[@edsall_blacks_1975]

- Avoiding the Slippery Slope: Baltimore: The Struggle Upward, Jun 24, 1974



### Symbolic meaning

Similar trends can be seen in the celebration of "soul food" restaurants such as The Yellow Bowl and the (restaurant in southwest Baltimore maybe on Baltimore Street).

- Madison Park historic district
- Negro War Heroes Monument

Examples include a 1969 picket at Roth's Market

One important sites of organizing and activism are the former 

 <!-- FIXME: Add the location of the market and the reason for the protest. -->

## Changing leadership and organization of the Civil Rights movement

<!-- NOTE: How were black and white Baltimore residents effected by the Civil Rights movement and related issues? How about in the suburbs? -->

- Changing individual leadership
- Changing organizations
- Intersections
  - Feminism
  - LGBTQ Rights
  - Disability Rights

### Changing individual leadership

The people and organizations that supported Civil Rights activism in Baltimore experienced major changes in the late 1960s and 1970s. These changes reflected broader changes in the movement driven, in part, by the new access black residents and activists had to formal institutions.

One notable example of these changes is the 1969 election of Enolia McMillan as president of the Baltimore Branch of the NAACP. McMillan's election won an upset victory over Juanita Jackson Mitchell, who sought the post after her mother, Lillie M. Jackson, stepped down after serving thirty four years as president of the group.[@brewington_enolia_2006]

This period was marked by the passing of an earlier generation of local Civil Rights leaders, many of whom remained active in local politics up until their death. [Dr. Furman Templeton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furman_L._Templeton), the executive director of the Baltimore Urban League since 1950, died on February 12, 1970.[@_dr._1970]  Physician and long-time activist Dr. John Camper died on Nov 21, 1977.[@_physician_1977]

African American Baltimoreans found new opportunities in private businesses. In 1968, Maryland National (Baltimore's largest bank) appointed E. Thomas Williams as the bank's first black manager.[@jones_black_1976]

Oher prominent activists and organizers in this period included Walter Percival Carter (1923 - d. July 31, 1971).[@_rites_1971] Aiden Faust describes Carter's significant legacy writing:

> Walter Percival Carter was a social worker and civil rights activist who led Baltimore’s chapter of the Congress on Racial Equality (CORE), organized voter registration drives and freedom rides, served as Maryland's coordinator for the 1963 March on Washington, and was involved with protests to desegregate employment at Baltimore Gas and Electric, Gwynn Oak amusement park, and Howard Johnson hotels.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 38-39]

As the chief community organizer for Baltimore's Model Cities agency, Carter shows how many activists transitioned in this period to work within local and state government rather than solely on the outside. These changes affected not only activists but other black Baltimoreans as well. By 1971, African American workers held 46% of the 41,000 municipal jobs in Baltimore City including some key leadership positions. 

Linwood Ivey is another example of a public employee and administrator whose work sought to serve the broader goals of the Civil Rights movement. Originally appointed as the director of the Community Action Agency (CAA), Ivey continued to lead the succeeeding Model City Agency (MCA), and the Ubran Services Agency (USA).[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 55]

In July 1971, Ronald N. Patterson, previously a resident of Seattle, came to Baltimore to serve as the first black school superintendent.[@sartain_borders_2013, 171]

<!-- NOTE: That same year, a group of African American Baltimore City police officers founded their own organization the Vanguard Justice Society. What was the purpose of this organization? Who were the members? In 1984, Mayor Schaefer appointed the first black police commissioner. -->

Others went from public workers to hold elected office. Charles Blount, a former principal at Dunbar High School, served on the Community Action Commission in 1968 and won election to the Maryland State Senate in 1971. Later, in 1985, Blount resigned from the board of the Urban Services Agency to protest the regressive cuts and policy changes affecting the organization.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 67]

On January 3, 1971, Parren Mitchell took office as the first black member of the U.S. Congress from a Southern state since Reconstruction. Mitchell had experience advocating for Civil Rights within and outside of government. From 1963 to 1965 he was executive secretary of the Maryland Human Relations Commission, overseeing implementation of the state's public accommodations law. Mitchell then became director of the Baltimore Community Action Agency, an anti-poverty program, from 1965 to 1968, when he resigned and returned to Morgan State as a professor of sociology and assistant director of its Urban Affairs Institute. In 1969, he became the President of Baltimore Neighborhoods, Inc. where he continued through 1970. Parren Mitchell was elected as a Democrat in 1970 served seven succeeding terms in Congress from January 3, 1971 through January 3, 1987.

White activists and allies also played a significant role in this period. Walter Sondheim, for example, was hailed as a "civic leader" for his management of the desegration of Baltimore's public schools and downtown urban renewal efforts.[@dorsey_prolific_1975]

### Changing organizations

Residents and community groups:

> Evergreen Protective Association made a lifetime membership donation to the NAACP in the early 1960s. Their commitment to civil rights activism included providing “sandwiches, coffee and milk” along with the League of Women Voters and the Dunbar PTA, to students from Dunbar High School engaged in a sit-in at the Baltimore Department of Education in the spring of 1964. (From Edmondson Avenue National Register nomination)

U-JOIN:

> A significant aspect of this move toward addressing structural problems entailed the formation of student groups like Baltimore’s U-JOIN, headed by Lively, and CORE, which engaged in anti-poverty activism, understanding it as central to anti-racist struggles, in the early 1960s. U-JOIN was founded by members of Baltimore SDS as part of its Emergency Rehabilitation Assistance Project (ERAP) and included students from Hopkins, Goucher, and Morgan, as well as non-students and people that dropped out of school to fight for social justice. ERAP, according to Rhonda Williams, was "hoping to build an ‘interracial movement’ by galvanizing poor people at the grass roots around issues such as housing, schools, medical care, and food insecurity."[@zanoni_working_2013, 55]

Paul Coates on the Black Panther Party in Baltimore (early 1969 to late 1972):

> I thought that the party was doing things that would have an impact on the lives of black people. It seemed like a good vehicle. When I came in, I had only a limited basis for understanding the world. I just knew it was fucked up. But I had no perspective, no point of view. No process for sorting out the significance of the things I was seeing and experiencing, no process for validating my views against those of other people. In the party I began to develop my own system of political understanding. The party had a structure in place to encourage political education. He provided a setting where I could interact with people who are searching for answers, and with some who thought they knew the answers.[@mcdougall_black_1993, 59]

White allies of the Black Panther Party; Baltimore Committee for Political Freedom "formed because of fear that the local police were planning to assassinate Black Panther Party leaders in the city"; membership included[@mcdougall_black_1993, 58]:

- Dr. Peter Rossi, Social Relations Department of Johns Hopkins University
- William Zinman, attorney for the Maryland ACLU
- Rev. Chester Wickwire, white minister

New organizations emerged such as the Soul School and Mother Rescuers. The Black Panthers, established in Oakland in October 1966, had established a Baltimore Chapter by 1968 but suffered from internal divisions and surveillance and harassment from the  from federal and local police. This is exemplified by the arrest of  Marshall "Eddie" Conway on April 23, 1970.[@conway_marshall_2011]

### Civil Rights movement and feminism

The growth of the feminist movement at a national level brought new opportunities for African American women in Baltimore during this period and focused attention on sexism within the Civil Rights movement and racism within the feminist movement.

The late 1960s and early 1970s saw major changes for national policies affecting women. On October 13, 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson issued [Executive Order 11375](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_11375) forbidding sex discrimination in businesses working with the government. In 1972, Congress passed [Title IX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title_IX) of the [1972 Educational Amendments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_Amendments_of_1972) to the Civil Rights Act to enforce sex equality in education (forcing educational institutions to support women's sports).  On January 22, 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down many state abortion laws with the _[Roe v. Wade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roev.Wade)_ decision.

Activists also organized at the national level as in 1966 the National Organization for Women (NOW) organized in Washington, DC and, in 1973, the National Black Feminist Organization formed in New York.

<!-- TODO: Write about contraception;  family planning; women's health.

> In the 1960s, PPM began providing education and training services in addition to direct health care. Clinics were opened in churches and universities; chapters were founded in other communities; education centers flourished in nearly every county in the state. Federal and state funding reached an all-time high in the 70s, only to be cut drastically in the next decade by President Ronald Reagan. PPM throughout this time maintained a strong history of growth and stability.

See more at: https://www.plannedparenthood.org/planned-parenthood-maryland/who-we-are/history-highlights#sthash.scGkXncW.dpuf -->

## Shift to community development issues

The shift of Baltimore's Civil Rights movement to focus on community development was an evolution, not a revolution, from the work of prior decades. After all, affordable housing and public health for African Americans had emerged and remained major concerns for local activists throughout the twentieth century. However, in the late 1960s and into the 1970s, activists now had new resources from the city and the federal government to pursue community goals. In addition, many hoped to learn from the failure of "urban renewal" programs in Harlem Park and other neighborhoods in the 1940s and 1950s and shift to an approach where community residents and community-based organizations took on more prominent leadership roles in the process.

Echoing later community development efforts activists pursued both an "inside" and "outside" game. The "inside" game work in historically segregated black neighborhoods to do work including:

- Expanding access to culture, arts, and recreation (e.g. Operation CHAMP; Eubie Blake Cultural Center)
- Job training and business development
- Affordable housing development (especially in partnership with churches, e.g. St. James Terrace; N.M. Carroll Apartments)

The outside game focused on:

- Housing segregation and discrimination (especially in Baltimore County or historically segrgeated white neighborhoods)
- Hiring policies for white-owned businesses

These efforts are exemplified by nonprofit groups like the Druid Heights Community Development Corporation (established 1974) and Baltimoreans United in Leadership Development (BUILD) (founded 1977); and by new city and state agencies such as the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture (MCAAHC) (established 1969).

<!-- TODO: What about the Model Cities program? -->

<!-- TODO: Write more about the history of Druid Heights CDC - http://dev.druidheights.com/about/history/ -->
<!-- TODO: Figure out if this is at all related. "1975 as Southeast Development, Inc. (SDI), it was the development arm of the Southeast Community Organization (SECO)" http://www.southeastcdc.org/who-we-are/mission/ -->
<!-- TODO: FIgure out role for unions and labor groups. https://1199seiu.org/history + "Property service workers first organized in the Washington D.C. area in the early 1940s, and we were on the front lines in the movement to unionize thousands of commercial janitors and cleaners throughout the U.S." http://www.seiu32bj.org/districts/dc-va-md/ -->

Ultimately, these efforts in Baltimore contributed to a national effort to change federal policy. For example, the [Equal Credit Opportunity Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Credit_Opportunity_Act) was approved in 1974 to make it against the law for any creditor to discriminate against any applicant by race, gender. In 1977, the [Community Reinvestment Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_Reinvestment_Act) passed.

### Urban renewal in Upton

U.S. Clears $18.6 Million For Upton Plan, Jun 8, 1971

> The final federal approval for an $18.6 million grant to Baltimore to finance the Upton urban renewal plan was announcel here today by Representative Paul Sarbanes (D., 4th).[@odonnell_u.s._1971]

3.2 million spent so far on Upton, March 18, 1973:

> Urban renewal planning in Upton began in late 1967. The Upton Planning Committee, made up of residents of the area, was formed in January, 1968. In May, the original renewal area was expanded to include the group...[@_3.2_1973]

See Glory of 'The Avenue' lies in rubble, awaiting delayed revitalization in Upton, Dec 30, 1975[@wickham_glory_1975]

After 7 years of delays, setbacks, Greenwillow Manor project about to begin, Jan 19, 1976

> Ground will be broken this morning for a housing project that seven Baltimore churches started to discuss among themselves nearly seven years ago. After many setbacks, the constraction of Greenwillow Manor in the Upton urban renewal...[@_after_1976]

See also: Upton renewal site gets new building, Jan 25, 1976[@_upton_1976]

### Anti-poverty efforts

By late 1969, as the Baltimore Welfare Rights Organization (BWRO) began to grow, Governor Marvin Mandel (then still serving out the remainder of Spiro Agnew's term after Agnew became Vice-President) moved to abolish the State Board of Social Services as part of a broader plan to move state agencies from a board to a secretary system. Historian Rhonda Williams quotes Barbara Stevenson, the only welfare recipient and woman on the nine-member board, who described the abolition of the board as an "assault on the poor both black and white", as a possible "means to stop demonstrations and protests" and as an effort to stymie "rapport built with welfare rights' organizations and other groups."[@williams_living_1998, 288-289]

Historian Rhonda Williams describes a campaign from 1966 to 1978 that put the welfare department, housing authority, and city officials "on notice" by:

> calling attention to its commitment to business and revitalization while ignoring or heaping the burden on the backs of poor people."[@williams_living_1998, 304]

Historian Rhonda Williams quotes the "battle cry" issued in 1969 by the [National Welfare Rights Organization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Welfare_Rights_Organization) (NWRO) and adopted by local activists:

> We are not willing to sell our rights as American citizens, our rights to dignity, our rights to justice, our rights to democracy, for the food, clothing and shelter which our age, our disability, the absence or death of our family’s breadwinner, our lack of economic opportunity, our society, have made us unable to provide.[@williams_living_1998, 305]

### Arts and culture

In 1969, the state established the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture (MCAAHC).

AFRAM

<!-- TODO: Interview w/ Art Cohen http://envisionbaltimore.blogspot.com/2013/07/the-freeway-revolts-brief-history-of.html -->

### Public housing

Public and low-income housing, both existing and new, served as an important site of organizing and of conflict during the late 1960s and 1970s. Tenants' rights groups organized among residents at Fairfield, Lafayette Courts, and Murphy Homes, among others. (see p. 176)

### Urban renewal projects

Faust:

> At the time of its inception, the Baltimore Urban Services Agency inherited 23 neighborhood centers from its predecessor antipoverty agencies. These centers were distributed across the city, with higher concentrations in East and West Baltimore, where the poorest neighborhoods were (and still are) concentrated. The centers occupied repurposed churches, storefronts, libraries, public baths, or (in the case of Dunbar) associated with an existing public high school. These diverse settings served as multipurpose centers for many programs and classes for children, teens, senior citizens, young mothers, the homeless, and families in crisis. Food pantries, yoga classes, poetry readings, dance performances, legal assistance, home heating assistance, library services, and many more programmatic offerings coexisted in these spaces.[@faust_neighborhood_2015, 55-56]

Low-income Housing on 1300 block of Madison Avenue:

> The Reverend Bascom, pastor of Douglass Memorial Community Church, purchased the entire 1300 block of Madison Avenue with church funds, renovated the buildings, and converted them to low-income housing. This development reflects the transition of the Civil Rights movement towards a renewed focus on community and economic development in the 1960s and 1970s.

Example from Upton:

- 1972: funds for the Upton project approved by federal government[@mcdougall_black_1993, 56]
- 1973 (McDougall says 1972): Nixon established a "moratorium on disbursements of federal money for such projects"[@mcdougall_black_1993, 56] (Source: This [history of HUD timeline](https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/about/hud_history) which also jumps from 1937 to 1965 without a single event in between!)

## School and housing segregation

- School segregation
- Housing segregation

### School segregation

1968 ruling in *Green v. New Kent County*: "free choice had to produce results: it had to integrate schools to be constitutionally acceptable."

After the city's "top legal officer" submitted a opinon calling Baltimore's school choice policy unconstitutional; Schaefer "had no interest in considering the Supreme Court decision and revisiting desegregation, because 'immediately the question of race comes in.'"[@baum_how_2011, 162]

January 1970 incident:

> A white teacher at Eastern High School reportedly used a racial slur with a black student. Students protests, and someone called the police, who allegedly mistreated students and eventually arrested eight. Students were sent home, and many went to Baltimore City College High School, where students joined the protest and City was also closed.[@baum_how_2011, 163]

Note: Baum continues to describe the proposal for busing in 1974.

White opposition to 1974 organized by the Southeast Desegregation Coalition (in part supported by the South East Community Organization?); then City Council member Barbara Mikulski wrote a letter to the editor of the *East Baltimore Guide*: "I am totally opposed to forced cross-town busing."[@baum_how_2011, 164]

1975: Federal Office of Civil Rights begins enforcement hearings against Maryland

### Housing segregation and discrimination

In 1969, a coalition of black and white civil rights advocates, including chairman Sampson Green, an African-American attorney, member of the Maryland Human Relations Commission, and housing committee chairman, and John J. Martinez, white Jesuit teacher at St. Bernadine's, organized The Activists—an interracial fair housing organization. The group targeted the Morris Goldseker Company with protests outside its downtown offices highlighting its role as "block-busters." Operating under a variety of names, the Goldseker-related realty companies doubled the mark-up on house sales in Edmondson Village in comparison to other areas. The Activists described how companies purchased houses for an average of $7,320 and sold them for an average of $12,387, a markup of 69%, with the inescapable conclusion that, "The dollar in the hands of the white man buys more than the dollar in the hands of the black man."[@orser_blockbusting_1994, 134-135]

In August 1970, the U.S. Civil Rights Commission holds hearing on suburban development in Baltimore County.



See: Hardesty, Richard. “‘A Veil of Voodoo’: George P. Mahoney, Open Housing, and the 1966 Governor’s Race.” Maryland Historical Magazine 104, no. 2 (Summer 2009): 145–83.

## Police violence, surveillance, and repression of activism



---

# References