---
layout: page
title: 1968-1976
categories: bigfoot
tags: draft
---

## Introduction

Changing leadership and organizations
- e.g. Soul School, Mother Rescuers
- End of Black Panthers (Black Panther Marshall "Eddie" Conway arrested in Baltimore)
- 

Gender becomes a more visible issue
- 

## How did the history of Civil Rights change within this period?

### Changing leadership and organization

- Actually have a vehicle for enforcement (Civil Rights Commission)
- Institutionalized (access to power) MHACC, Maryland Human Rights Commission, working within rather than outside (Vanguard Justice Society)

New leadership at NAACP

### Gender

The growth of the feminist movement at a national level brought new opportunities for African American women in Baltimore during this period and focused attention on sexism within the Civil Rights movement and racism within the feminist movement.

- In **1966**: the National Organization for Women (NOW) organized in Washington, DC
- ** October 13, 1967**: President Lyndon B. Johnson issues [Executive Order 11375](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_11375) forbidding sex discrimination in businesses working with the government.
- **1972**: Congress passed [Title IX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title_IX) of the [1972 Educational Amendments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education_Amendments_of_1972) to the Civil Rights Act to enforce sex equality in education, (forcing educational institutions to support women's sports).
- **1973**: National Black Feminist Organization formed in New York
- **January 22, 1973**: Supreme Court strikes down many state abortion laws with the [Roe v. Wade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roe_v._Wade) decision.

**Note**: These examples are all national – this section needs more local examples and context for Baltimore.

### Shift to community development issues

- Model Cities

- Struggle shifts to community development v. legal right (after period see Baltimoreans United in Leadership Development (BUILD) founded 1977, Community Reinvestment Act 1977
- **1974**: [Equal Credit Opportunity Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_Credit_Opportunity_Act) to make it against the law for any creditor to discriminate against any applicant by race, gender


## Why did these changes take place?


## Contributions of individuals and groups

## 
1975
Federal Office of Civil Rights begins enforcement hearings against Maryland


- Parren Mitchell
- 

	•	 How Civil Rights issues developed and changed at a local, state and national level?
	•	 Why did the development/change of those issues take place?
	•	 What contributions did individuals and groups make?
	•	 What factors outside of Baltimore (state, national, and international events) contributed?


## Outside factors
…


## Related Properties